Backwards: 
    The poem can start with him walking backwards into a room.
    He takes off his jacket and sits down for the rest of his life;
    that’s how we bring Dad back.
    I can make the blood run back up my nose, ants rushing into a hole.
    We grow into smaller bodies, my breasts disappear,
    your cheeks soften, teeth sink back into gums.
    I can make us loved, just say the word.
    Give them stumps for hands if even once they touched us without consent,
    I can write the poem and make it disappear.
    Step-Dad spits liquor back into glass,
    Mum’s body rolls back up the stairs, the bone pops back into place,
    maybe she keeps the baby.
    Maybe we’re okay kid?
    I’ll rewrite this whole life and this time there’ll be so much love,
    you won’t be able to see beyond it.
    
    You won’t be able to see beyond it,
    I’ll rewrite this whole life and this time there’ll be so much love.
    Maybe we’re okay kid,
    maybe she keeps the baby.
    Mum’s body rolls back up the stairs, the bone pops back into place,
    Step-Dad spits liquor back into glass.
    I can write the poem and make it disappear,
    give them stumps for hands if even once they touched us without consent,
    I can make us loved, just say the word.
    Your cheeks soften, teeth sink back into gums
    we grow into smaller bodies, my breasts disappear.
    I can make the blood run back up my nose, ants rushing into a hole,
    that’s how we bring Dad back.
    He takes off his jacket and sits down for the rest of his life.
    The poem can start with him walking backwards into a room.

Conversations About Home:
    Well, I think home spat me out, the blackouts and curfews like tongue against loose tooth. God, do you know how difficult it is, to talk about the day your own city dragged you by the hair, past the old prison, past the school gates, past the burning torsos erected on poles like flags? When I meet others like me I recognise the longing, the missing, the memory of ash on their faces. No one leaves home unless home is the mouth of a shark. I've been carrying the old anthem in my mouth for so long that there's no space for another song, another tongue or another language. I know a shame that shrouds, totally engulfs. I tore up and ate my own passport in an airport hotel. I'm bloated with language I can't afford to forget.
    *
    They ask me how did you get here? Can't you see it on my body? The Libyan desert red with immigrant bodies, the Gulf of Aden bloated, the city of Rome with no jacket. I hope the journey meant more than miles because all of my children are in the water. I thought the sea was safer than the land. I want to make love but my hair smells of war and running and running. I want to lay down, but these countries are like uncles who touch you when you're young and asleep. Look at all these borders, foaming at the mouth with bodies broken and desperate. I'm the colour of hot sun on my face, my mother's remains were never buried. I spent days and nights in the stomach of the truck, I did not come out the same. Sometimes it feels like someone else is wearing my body.
    *
    I know a few things to be true. I do not know where I am going, where I have come from is disappearing, I am unwelcome and my beauty is not beauty here. My body is burning with the shame of not belonging, my body is longing. I am the sin of memory and the absence of memory. I watch the news and my mouth becomes a sink full of blood. The lines, the forms, the people at the desks, the calling cards, the immigration officer, the looks on the street, the cold settling deep into my bones, the English classes at night, the distance I am from home. But Alhamdulilah all of this is better than the scent of a woman completely on fire, or a truckload of men who look like my father, pulling out my teeth and nails, or fourteen men between my legs, or a gun, or a promise, or a lie, or his name, or his manhood in my mouth.
    *
    I hear them say, go home, I hear them say, fucking immigrants, fucking refugees. Are they really this arrogant? Do they not know that stability is like a lover with a sweet mouth upon your body one second and the next you are a tremor lying on the floor covered in rubble and old currency waiting for its return. All I can say is, I was once like you, the apathy, the pity, the ungrateful placement and now my home is the mouth of a shark, now my home is the barrel of a gun. I'll see you on the other side.

Dear Moon:
    We blame you for floods
    for the flush of blood
    for men who are also wolves
    and even though you could pull
    the tide in by its hair
    we tell people that we walked all
    over you
    we blame you for the night
    for the dark
    for the ghosts
    you cold unimaginable thing
    following us home,
    we use you
    to see each others frail
    naked bodies beneath your blue light,
    we let you watch; you
    swollen against the glass
    breath a halo of steam
    as we move against one another
    wet and desperate
    like fish under
    a waterlogged sky

Fire:
    i

    The morning you were made to leave
    she sat on the front steps,
    dress tucked between her thighs,
    a packet of Marlboro Lights
    near her bare feet, painting her nails
    until the polish curdled.
    Her mother phoned-

    What do you mean he hit you?
    Your father hit me all the time
    but I never left him.
    He pays the bills
    and he comes home at night,
    what more do you want?
    Later that night she picked the polish off
    with her front teeth until the bed you shared
    for seven years seemed speckled with glitter
    and blood.

    ii

    On the drive to the hotel, you remember
    the funeral you went to as a little boy,
    double burial for a couple who
    burned to death in their bedroom.
    The wife had been visited
    by her husband's lover,
    a young and beautiful woman who paraded
    her naked body in the couple's kitchen,
    lifting her dress to expose breasts
    mottled with small fleshy marks,
    a back sucked and bruised, then dressed herself
    and walked out of the front door.
    The wife, waiting for her husband to come home,
    doused herself in lighter fluid. On his arrival
    she jumped on him, wrapping her legs around
    his torso. The husband, surprised at her sudden urge,
    carried his wife to the bedroom, where
    she straddled him on their bed, held his face
    against her chest and lit a match.
    iii

    A young man greets you in the elevator.
    He smiles like he has pennies hidden in his cheeks.
    You're looking at his shoes when he says
    the rooms in this hotel are sweltering.
    Last night in bed I swear I thought
    my body was on fire.

For Woman Who Are Difficult to Love:
    you are a horse running alone
    and he tries to tame you
    compares you to an impossible highway
    to a burning house
    says you are blinding him
    that he could never leave you
    forget you
    want anything but you
    you dizzy him, you are unbearable
    every woman before or after you
    is doused in your name
    you fill his mouth
    his teeth ache with memory of taste
    his body just a long shadow seeking yours
    but you are always too intense
    frightening in the way you want him
    unashamed and sacrificial
    he tells you that no man can live up to the one who
    lives in your head
    and you tried to change didn't you?
    closed your mouth more
    tried to be softer
    prettier
    less volatile, less awake
    but even when sleeping you could feel
    him travelling away from you in his dreams
    so what did you want to do, love
    split his head open?
    you can't make homes out of human beings
    someone should have already told you that
    and if he wants to leave
    then let him leave
    you are terrifying
    and strange and beautiful
    something not everyone knows how to love.

Her Blue Body Full of Light:
    Can you believe I have cancer? Yosra asks,
    a mug of tea between her hands,
    almost laughing, hair cut close to her scalp.
    I imagine the cancer auditioning
    inside her body, tiny translucent slivers
    of light weaving in and out and of her abdomen
    and uterus, travelling up and through her throat,
    needlepoints of light, fireworks glimmering down, the body
    burning into itself, deep sea blue inside
    her body, her ribcage an aquarium,
    the cancer spreading and spreading, deep space,
    her throat a lava lamp, sparklers beneath breastbone—
    a lightshow, a million tiny jellyfish, orchestral womb,
    kaleidoscopic ovaries, disco ball heart,
    her skin glowing and glowing,
    lit from the inside

Home:
    no one leaves home unless
    home is the mouth of a shark
    you only run for the border
    when you see the whole city running as well

    your neighbors running faster than you
    breath bloody in their throats
    the boy you went to school with
    who kissed you dizzy behind the old tin factory
    is holding a gun bigger than his body
    you only leave home
    when home won't let you stay.

    no one leaves home unless home chases you
    fire under feet
    hot blood in your belly
    it's not something you ever thought of doing
    until the blade burnt threats into
    your neck
    and even then you carried the anthem under
    your breath
    only tearing up your passport in an airport toilets
    sobbing as each mouthful of paper
    made it clear that you wouldn't be going back.

    you have to understand,
    that no one puts their children in a boat
    unless the water is safer than the land
    no one burns their palms
    under trains
    beneath carriages
    no one spends days and nights in the stomach of a truck
    feeding on newspaper unless the miles travelled
    means something more than journey.
    no one crawls under fences
    no one wants to be beaten
    pitied

    no one chooses refugee camps
    or strip searches where your
    body is left aching
    or prison,
    because prison is safer
    than a city of fire
    and one prison guard
    in the night
    is better than a truckload
    of men who look like your father
    no one could take it
    no one could stomach it
    no one skin would be tough enough

    the
    go home blacks
    refugees
    dirty immigrants
    asylum seekers
    sucking our country dry
    niggers with their hands out
    they smell strange
    savage
    messed up their country and now they want
    to mess ours up
    how do the words
    the dirty looks
    roll off your backs
    maybe because the blow is softer
    than a limb torn off

    or the words are more tender
    than fourteen men between
    your legs
    or the insults are easier
    to swallow
    than rubble
    than bone
    than your child body
    in pieces.
    i want to go home,
    but home is the mouth of a shark
    home is the barrel of the gun
    and no one would leave home
    unless home chased you to the shore
    unless home told you
    to quicken your legs
    leave your clothes behind
    crawl through the desert
    wade through the oceans
    drown
    save
    be hunger
    beg
    forget pride
    your survival is more important

    no one leaves home until home is a sweaty voice in your ear
    saying-
    leave,
    run away from me now
    i dont know what i've become
    but i know that anywhere
    is safer than here

How to Wear your Mothers Lipstick:
    You must wear it like she wears disappointment on her face

    You must hide the surprise of tasting other men on your lips
    Your mother is a woman and women like her cannot be contained.

    You find the black tube inside her beauty case, where she keeps
    your fathers old prison letters,
    you desperately want to look like her,
    film star beauty, you hold your hand against your throat
    your mother was most beautiful when sprawled out on the floor
    half naked and bleeding.
    You go to the bathroom to apply the lipstick,
    somewhere no one can find you
    your teeth look brittle against the deep red slickness
    you smile like an infant, your mouth is a wound
    you look nothing like your mother
    you look everything like your mother.

    You call your ex-boyfriend, sit on the toilet seat and listen to
    the phone ring, when he picks up you say his name slow
    he says i thought i told you to stop calling me
    you lick your lips, you taste like years of being alone.

Midnight in the Foreign Food Aisle:
    Dear Uncle, is everything you love foreign
    or are you foreign to everything you love?
    We're all animals and the body wants what it wants,
    I know. The blonde said Come in, take off
    your coat and what do you want to drink?
    Love is not haram but after years of fucking
    women who cannot pronounce your name,
    you find yourself in the foreign food aisle,
    beside the turmeric and the saffron,
    pressing your face into the ground, praying
    in a language you haven't used in years.

Nail Technician as Palm Reader:
    The nail technician pushes my cuticles
    back, turns my hand over,
    stretches the skin on my palm
    and says I see your daughters
    and their daughters.

    That night, in a dream, the first girl emerges
    from a slit in my stomach. The scar heals
    into a smile. The man I love pulls the stitches out
    with his fingernails. We leave black sutures
    curling on the side of the bath.

    I wake as the second girl crawls
    head first up my throat—
    a flower, blossoming
    out of the hole in my face.

Our Blue Bodies:
    I have dreamt of you suspended
    in amniotic fluid, your hair fanned
    out and alive, long again, before the cancer.
    Undying, our movements synchronised,
    us, tied together at the navel,
    umbilical cord and all its length tugging
    at me, far as it might extend. Gregory Porter climbing
    through there will be no love that's dying
    here— his voice, and how it soothes you from
    beyond the distant wall of this maybe womb,
    the faint rhythm of a bigger heart
    above us.

Souvernir:
    I think I brought the war with me
    on my skin, a shroud
    circling my skull, matter under my nails.
    It sits at my feet while I watch TV.
    I hear its damp breath in the background
    of every phone call. I feel it sleeping
    between us in the bed. It lathers
    my back in the shower. It presses
    itself against me at the bathroom sink.
    At night, it passes me the pills, it holds
    my hand, I never meet its gaze.

The house:
    Mother says there are locked rooms inside all women; kitchen of lust,
    bedroom of grief, bathroom of apathy.
    Sometimes the men - they come with keys,
    and sometimes, the men - they come with hammers.

    Nin soo joog laga waayo, soo jiifso aa laga helaa,
    I said Stop, I said No and he did not listen.

    Perhaps she has a plan, perhaps she takes him back to hers
    only for him to wake up hours later in a bathtub full of ice,
    with a dry mouth, looking down at his new, neat procedure.

    I point to my body and say Oh this old thing? No, I just slipped it on.

    Are you going to eat that? I say to my mother, pointing to my father who is lying on the dining room table, his mouth stuffed with a red apple.

    The bigger my body is, the more locked rooms there are, the more men come with keys. Anwar didn’t push it all the way in, I still think about what he could have opened up inside of me. Basil came and hesitated at the door for three years. Johnny with the blue eyes came with a bag of tools he had used on other women: one hairpin, a bottle of bleach, a switchblade and a jar of Vaseline. Yusuf called out God’s name through the keyhole and no one answered. Some begged, some climbed the side of my body looking for a window, some said they were on their way and did not come.
    
    Show us on the doll where you were touched, they said.
    I said I don’t look like a doll, I look like a house.
    They said Show us on the house.

    Like this: two fingers in the jam jar
    Like this: an elbow in the bathwater
    Like this: a hand in the drawer.
    
    I should tell you about my first love who found a trapdoor under my left breast nine years ago, fell in and hasn’t been seen since. Every
    now and then I feel something crawling up my thigh. He should make himself known, I’d probably let him out. I hope he hasn’t
    bumped in to the others, the missing boys from small towns, with pleasant mothers, who did bad things and got lost in the maze of
    my hair. I treat them well enough, a slice of bread, if they’re lucky a piece of fruit. Except for Johnny with the blue eyes, who picked my locks and crawled in. Silly boy, chained to the basement of my fears, I play music to drown him out.
    
    Knock knock.
    Who’s there?
    No one.

    At parties I point to my body and say This is where love comes to die. Welcome, come in, make yourself at home. Everyone laughs, they think I’m joking.

The Ugly Daughter:
    Mother says there are locked rooms inside all women; kitchen of lust,
    bedroom of grief, bathroom of apathy.
    Sometimes the men - they come with keys,
    and sometimes, the men - they come with hammers.
    
    Nin soo joog laga waayo, soo jiifso aa laga helaa,
    I said Stop, I said No and he did not listen.
    
    Perhaps she has a plan, perhaps she takes him back to hers
    only for him to wake up hours later in a bathtub full of ice,
    with a dry mouth, looking down at his new, neat procedure.
    
    I point to my body and say Oh this old thing? No, I just slipped it on.
    
    Are you going to eat that? I say to my mother, pointing to my father who is lying on the dining room table, his mouth stuffed with a red apple.
    
    The bigger my body is, the more locked rooms there are, the more men come with keys. Anwar didn’t push it all the way in, I still think about what he could have opened up inside of me. Basil came and hesitated at the door for three years. Johnny with the blue eyes came with a bag of tools he had used on other women: one hairpin, a bottle of bleach, a switchblade and a jar of Vaseline. Yusuf called out God’s name through the keyhole and no one answered. Some begged, some climbed the side of my body looking for a window, some said they were on their way and did not come.
    
    Show us on the doll where you were touched, they said.
    I said I don’t look like a doll, I look like a house.
    They said Show us on the house.

    Like this: two fingers in the jam jar
    Like this: an elbow in the bathwater
    Like this: a hand in the drawer.
    
    I should tell you about my first love who found a trapdoor under my left breast nine years ago, fell in and hasn’t been seen since. Every
    now and then I feel something crawling up my thigh. He should make himself known, I’d probably let him out. I hope he hasn’t
    bumped in to the others, the missing boys from small towns, with pleasant mothers, who did bad things and got lost in the maze of
    my hair. I treat them well enough, a slice of bread, if they’re lucky a piece of fruit. Except for Johnny with the blue eyes, who picked my locks and crawled in. Silly boy, chained to the basement of my fears, I play music to drown him out.
    
    Knock knock.
    Who’s there?
    No one.
    
    At parties I point to my body and say This is where love comes to die. Welcome, come in, make yourself at home. Everyone laughs, they think I’m joking.

The Unbearable Weight of Staying:
    I don’t know when love became elusive
    What I know, is that no one I know has it.

    My father's arms around my mother's neck,
    Fruit too ripe to eat, a door half way open.
    When your name is a just a hand I can never hold,
    everything I have ever believed in, becomes magic.

    I think of lovers as trees, growing to and
    from one another, searching for the same light.
    My mother's laughter in a dark room,
    a photograph greying under my touch.
    This is all I know how to do, carry loss around until
    I begin to resemble every bad memory,
    every terrible fear,
    every nightmare anyone has ever had.
    I ask, did you ever love me?
    You say of course, of course so quickly
    that you sound like someone else
    I ask are you made of steel? are you made of iron?
    You cry on the phone, my stomach hurts

    I let you leave, I need someone who knows how to stay.

Trying to Swim with God:
    Istaqfurulah

    My mother says this city is slowly killing all our women;
    practising back strokes at the local swimming pool.
    I think of Kadija, how her body had failed her
    on the way down from the block of flats.

    The instructor tells us that the longest
    a human being has held their breath under water
    is 19 minutes and 21 seconds. At home in the bath,
    my hair swells to the surface like vines, I stay submerged
    until I can no longer stand it, think of all the things
    I have allowed to slip through my fingers.
    Inna lillahi Wa inna ilaihi Rajioon.

    My mother says no one can fight it —
    the body returning to God,

    but the way she fell, face first,
    in the dirt,
    mouth full of earth,
    air, teeth, blood,
    wearing a white cotton baati,
    hair untied and smoked with ounsi,
    I wonder if Kadija believed

    she was going to float.

Ugly:
    Your daughter is ugly.
    She knows loss intimately,
    carries whole cities in her belly.

    As a child, relatives wouldn't hold her.
    She was splintered wood and sea water.
    They said she reminded them of the war.

    On her fifteenth birthday you taught her
    how to tie her hair like rope
    and smoke it over burning frankincense.

    You made her gargle rosewater
    and while she coughed, said
    macaanto girls like you shouldn't smell
    of lonely or empty.

    You are her mother.
    Why did you not warn her,
    hold her like a rotting boat
    and tell her that men will not love her
    if she is covered in continents,
    if her teeth are small colonies,
    if her stomach is an island
    if her thighs are borders?

    What man wants to lay down
    and watch the world burn
    in his bedroom?

    Your daughter's face is a small riot,
    her hands are a civil war,
    a refugee camp behind each ear,
    a body littered with ugly things

    but God,
    doesn't she wear
    the world well.

What We Have:
    Our men do not belong to us. Even my own father, left one afternoon, is not mine. My brother is in prison, is not mine. My uncles, they go back home and they are shot in the head, are not mine. My cousins, stabbed in the street for being too—or not—enough, are not mine.

    Then the men we try to love, say we carry too much loss, wear too much black, are too heavy to be around, much too sad to love. Then they leave and we mourn them too. Is that what we're here for? To sit at kitchen tables, counting on our fingers the ones who died, those who left and the others who were taken by the police, or by drugs, or by illness or by other women. It makes no sense. Look at your skin, her mouth, these lips, those eyes, my God, listen to that laugh. The only darkness we should allow into our lives is the night, and even then, we have the moon.