Before Dark:
    From the porch at dusk I watched
    a kingfisher wild in flight
    he could only have made for joy.

    He came down the river, splashing
    against the water’s dimming face
    like a skipped rock, passing

    on down out of sight. And still
    I could hear the splashes
    farther and farther away

    as it grew darker. He came back
    the same way, dusky as his shadow,
    sudden beyond the willows.

    The splashes went on out of hearing.
    It was dark then. Somewhere
    the night had accommodated him

    —at the place he was headed for
    or where, led by his delight,
    he came.

Enemies:
    If you are not to become a monster,
    you must care what they think.
    If you care what they think,

    how will you not hate them,
    and so become a monster
    of the opposite kind? From where then

    is love to come—love for your enemy
    that is the way of liberty?
    From forgiveness. Forgiven, they go

    free of you, and you of them;
    they are to you as sunlight
    on a green branch. You must not

    think of them again, except
    as monsters like yourself,
    pitiable because unforgiving.

They Sit Together on the Porch:
    They sit together on the porch, the dark
    Almost fallen, the house behind them dark.
    Their supper done with, they have washed and dried
    The dishes–only two plates now, two glasses,
    Two knives, two forks, two spoons–small work for two.
    She sits with her hands folded in her lap,
    At rest. He smokes his pipe. They do not speak,
    And when they speak at last it is to say
    What each one knows the other knows. They have
    One mind between them, now, that finally
    For all its knowing will not exactly know
    Which one goes first through the dark doorway, bidding
    Goodnight, and which sits on a while alone.

The Vacation:
    Once there was a man who filmed his vacation.
    He went flying down the river in his boat
    with his video camera to his eye, making
    a moving picture of the moving river
    upon which his sleek boat moved swiftly
    toward the end of his vacation. He showed
    his vacation to his camera, which pictured it,
    preserving it forever: the river, the trees,
    the sky, the light, the bow of his rushing boat
    behind which he stood with his camera
    preserving his vacation even as he was having it
    so that after he had had it he would still
    have it. It would be there. With a flick
    of a switch, there it would be. But he
    would not be in it. He would never be in it.