Among School Children:
    I

    I walk through the long schoolroom questioning;
    A kind old nun in a white hood replies;
    The children learn to cipher and to sing,
    To study reading-books and history,
    To cut and sew, be neat in everything
    In the best modern way—the children's eyes
    In momentary wonder stare upon
    A sixty-year-old smiling public man.


    II

    I dream of a Ledaean body, bent
    Above a sinking fire, a tale that she
    Told of a harsh reproof, or trivial event
    That changed some childish day to tragedy—
    Told, and it seemed that our two natures blent
    Into a sphere from youthful sympathy,
    Or else, to alter Plato's parable,
    Into the yolk and white of the one shell.


    III

    And thinking of that fit of grief or rage
    I look upon one child or t'other there
    And wonder if she stood so at that age—
    For even daughters of the swan can share
    Something of every paddler's heritage—
    And had that colour upon cheek or hair,
    And thereupon my heart is driven wild:
    She stands before me as a living child.


    IV

    Her present image floats into the mind—
    Did Quattrocento finger fashion it
    Hollow of cheek as though it drank the wind
    And took a mess of shadows for its meat?
    And I though never of Ledaean kind
    Had pretty plumage once—enough of that,
    Better to smile on all that smile, and show
    There is a comfortable kind of old scarecrow.


    V

    What youthful mother, a shape upon her lap
    Honey of generation had betrayed,
    And that must sleep, shriek, struggle to escape
    As recollection or the drug decide,
    Would think her son, did she but see that shape
    With sixty or more winters on its head,
    A compensation for the pang of his birth,
    Or the uncertainty of his setting forth?


    VI

    Plato thought nature but a spume that plays
    Upon a ghostly paradigm of things;
    Solider Aristotle played the taws
    Upon the bottom of a king of kings;
    World-famous golden-thighed Pythagoras
    Fingered upon a fiddle-stick or strings
    What a star sang and careless Muses heard:
    Old clothes upon old sticks to scare a bird.


    VII

    Both nuns and mothers worship images,
    But those the candles light are not as those
    That animate a mother's reveries,
    But keep a marble or a bronze repose.
    And yet they too break hearts—O Presences
    That passion, piety or affection knows,
    And that all heavenly glory symbolise—
    O self-born mockers of man's enterprise;


    VIII

    Labour is blossoming or dancing where
    The body is not bruised to pleasure soul,
    Nor beauty born out of its own despair,
    Nor blear-eyed wisdom out of midnight oil.
    O chestnut tree, great rooted blossomer,
    Are you the leaf, the blossom or the bole?
    O body swayed to music, O brightening glance,
    How can we know the dancer from the dance?

Byzantium:
    The unpurged images of day recede;
    The Emperor's drunken soldiery are abed;
    Night resonance recedes, night-walkers' song
    After great cathedral gong;
    A starlit or a moonlit dome disdains
    All that man is,
    All mere complexities,
    The fury and the mire of human veins.

    Before me floats an image, man or shade,
    Shade more than man, more image than a shade;
    For Hades' bobbin bound in mummy-cloth
    May unwind the winding path;
    A mouth that has no moisture and no breath
    Breathless mouths may summon;
    I hail the superhuman;
    I call it death-in-life and life-in-death.

    Miracle, bird or golden handiwork,
    More miracle than bird or handiwork,
    Planted on the starlit golden bough,
    Can like the cocks of Hades crow,
    Or, by the moon embittered, scorn aloud
    In glory of changeless metal
    Common bird or petal
    And all complexities of mire or blood.

    At midnight on the Emperor's pavement flit
    Flames that no faggot feeds, nor steel has lit,
    Nor storm disturbs, flames begotten of flame,
    Where blood-begotten spirits come
    And all complexities of fury leave,
    Dying into a dance,
    An agony of trance,
    An agony of flame that cannot singe a sleeve.

    Astraddle on the dolphin's mire and blood,
    Spirit after spirit! The smithies break the flood,
    The golden smithies of the Emperor!
    Marbles of the dancing floor
    Break bitter furies of complexity,
    Those images that yet
    Fresh images beget,
    That dolphin-torn, that gong-tormented sea.

The Cap and Bells:
    The jester walked in the garden:
    The garden had fallen still;
    He bade his soul rise upward
    And stand on her window-sill.

    It rose in a straight blue garment,
    When owls began to call:
    It had grown wise-tongued by thinking
    Of a quiet and light footfall;

    But the young queen would not listen;
    She rose in her pale night-gown;
    She drew in the heavy casement
    And pushed the latches down.

    He bade his heart go to her,
    When the owls called out no more;
    In a red and quivering garment
    It sang to her through the door.

    It had grown sweet-tongued by dreaming
    Of a flutter of flower-like hair;
    But she took up her fan from the table
    And waved it off on the air.

    'I have cap and bells,’ he pondered,
    'I will send them to her and die’;
    And when the morning whitened
    He left them where she went by.

    She laid them upon her bosom,
    Under a cloud of her hair,
    And her red lips sang them a love-song
    Till stars grew out of the air.

    She opened her door and her window,
    And the heart and the soul came through,
    To her right hand came the red one,
    To her left hand came the blue.

    They set up a noise like crickets,
    A chattering wise and sweet,
    And her hair was a folded flower
    And the quiet of love in her feet.

The Cold Heaven:
    Suddenly I saw the cold and rook-delighting heaven
    That seemed as though ice burned and was but the more ice,
    And thereupon imagination and heart were driven
    So wild that every casual thought of that and this
    Vanished, and left but memories, that should be out of season
    With the hot blood of youth, of love crossed long ago;
    And I took all the blame out of all sense and reason,
    Until I cried and trembled and rocked to and fro,
    Riddled with light. Ah! when the ghost begins to quicken,
    Confusion of the death-bed over, is it sent
    Out naked on the roads, as the books say, and stricken
    By the injustice of the skies for punishment?

A Dialogue of Self and Soul:
    I

    My Soul. I summon to the winding ancient stair;
    Set all your mind upon the steep ascent,
    Upon the broken, crumbling battlement,
    Upon the breathless starlit air,
    Upon the star that marks the hidden pole;
    Fix every wandering thought upon
    That quarter where all thought is done:
    Who can distinguish darkness from the soul?

    My Self. The consecrated blade upon my knees
    Is Sato's ancient blade, still as it was,
    Still razor-keen, still like a looking-glass
    Unspotted by the centuries;
    That flowering, silken, old embroidery, torn
    From some court-lady's dress and round
    The wooden scabbard bound and wound,
    Can, tattered, still protect, faded adorn.

    My Soul. Why should the imagination of a man
    Long past his prime remember things that are
    Emblematical of love and war?
    Think of ancestral night that can,
    If but imagination scorn the earth
    And intellect its wandering
    To this and that and t'other thing,
    Deliver from the crime of death and birth.

    My Self. Montashigi, third of his family, fashioned it
    Five hundred years ago, about it lie
    Flowers from I know not what embroidery—
    Heart's purple—and all these I set
    For emblems of the day against the tower
    Emblematical of the night,
    And claim as by a soldier's right
    A charter to commit the crime once more.

    My Soul. Such fullness in that quarter overflows
    And falls into the basin of the mind
    That man is stricken deaf and dumb and blind,
    For intellect no longer knows
    Is from the Ought, or Knower from the Known—
    That is to say, ascends to Heaven;
    Only the dead can be forgiven;
    But when I think of that my tongue's a stone.


    II

    My Self. A living man is blind and drinks his drop.
    What matter if the ditches are impure?
    What matter if I live it all once more?
    Endure that toil of growing up;
    The ignominy of boyhood; the distress
    Of boyhood changing into man;
    The unfinished man and his pain
    Brought face to face with his own clumsiness;

    The finished man among his enemies?—
    How in the name of Heaven can he escape
    That defiling and disfigured shape
    The mirror of malicious eyes
    Casts upon his eyes until at last
    He thinks that shape must be his shape?
    And what's the good of an escape
    If honour find him in the wintry blast?

    I am content to live it all again
    And yet again, if it be life to pitch
    Into the frog-spawn of a blind man's ditch,
    A blind man battering blind men;
    Or into that most fecund ditch of all,
    The folly that man does
    Or must suffer, if he woos
    A proud woman not kindred of his soul.

    I am content to follow to its source
    Every event in action or in thought;
    Measure the lot; forgive myself the lot!
    When such as I cast out remorse
    So great a sweetness flows into the breast
    We must laugh and we must sing,
    We are blest by everything,
    Everything we look upon is blest.

The Everlasting Voices:
    O sweet everlasting Voices, be still;
    Go to the guards of the heavenly fold
    And bid them wander obeying your will,
    Flame under flame, till Time be no more;
    Have you not heard that our hearts are old,
    That you call in birds, in wind on the hill,
    In shaken boughs, in tide on the shore?
    O sweet everlasting Voices, be still.

The Fascination of What’s Difficult:
    The fascination of what's difficult
    Has dried the sap out of my veins, and rent
    Spontaneous joy and natural content
    Out of my heart. There's something ails our colt
    That must, as if it had not holy blood
    Nor on Olympus leaped from cloud to cloud,
    Shiver under the lash, strain, sweat and jolt
    As though it dragged road metal. My curse on plays
    That have to be set up in fifty ways,
    On the day's war with every knave and dolt,
    Theatre business, management of men.
    I swear before the dawn comes round again
    I'll find the stable and pull out the bolt.

The Fish:
    Although you hide in the ebb and flow
    Of the pale tide when the moon has set,
    The people of coming days will know
    About the casting out of my net,
    And how you have leaped times out of mind
    Over the little silver cords,
    And think that you were hard and unkind,
    And blame you with many bitter words.
